---
layout: post
title: "Next.js Fundamentals Through Examples"
subtitle: "Next.js Basic Features Explained"
category: Development
tags: [Development, Next.js, Frontend, JavaScript]
author: [shemsedin_callaki]
comments: true
share: true
---

## Introduction
As static site generation becomes more and more popular so does the need for the
right tools and frameworks.

More often than not there are times when we need lightweight tools such as React to
consume a decoupled service and serve static pages. There are a lot of benefits of having a 
tool to generate static pages for various different reasons such as speed, caching using CDN, SEO etc.

The purpose of this blog post though is to explain [Next.js](https://nextjs.org) fundamentals - 
this great React framework that is growing in popularity. We will pick some of its features and will explain with 
examples and by doing so hopefully it will give readers a good grasp of the framework. 

## Assumption
As we will explain some of the Next.js features starting from beginning, the assumption
is that you are familiar with React or JavaScript.

## Prerequisites
Next.js requires Node.js to be installed.  If you have already installed Node.js to check the version you have run `node -v`
on your terminal and compare with the latest version [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) - the minimum supported version is Node.js 12.22.0.

## What is Next.js
Next.js is a React based framework built on top of Node.js, with Next.js you can do a wide range
of things from creating APIs to consuming external/internal APIs to server side rendering, static generation
and a lot more.

As we know React is a hugely popular library, see [some statistics here](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/trends?tags=reactjs%2Cvue.js%2Cangular), 
but it is only the view in the [MVC (Model View Controller)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller).  Next.js on the 
other hand is framework that is built on top of React and Node.js.  [The React documentation](https://reactjs.org/docs/create-a-new-react-app.html#nextjs)
makes mention of Next.js as one of recommended toolchain.

## Basic Features
There are lots of features that Next.js supports out the box but here I will only focus on
some of them such as:

* TypeScript
* Code Splitting
* Routing
* Static Generation 
* Data fetching

Without further ado let's get started on creating the application.

## Creating a Next.js Application
Next.js supports [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) out of the box, which means 
you don't need to do any additional configuration.

To create we can use the following command:

```shell
npx create-next-app
# or
yarn create next-app
```

For those of you not familiar, `npx` is a package runner and CLI tool which makes it easy to 
install and mange dependencies hosted in npm registry. `yarn` is a package manager.

## TypeScript
As we mentioned above TypeScript is fully supported in Next.js and to create an application that 
uses TypeScript you would type the following command:

```shell
npx create-next-app --ts
#or
yarn create next-app --typescript
```

As you can see we use `--ts` and `--typescript` flags to tell the CLI tool `create-next-app` to create the
application using TypeScript.

Now let's create our application by navigating to your preferred directory and type this
command on your terminal:

```shell
npx create-next-app nextjs-with-typescript --ts
```

`nextjs-with-typescript` is the name of our application.

The above script will install all the necessary dependencies and when it finishes
will print in the screen some commands that you can use to run the application.  That's all it is
to that, you will now be able to run the application without extra configuration that you would normally
need in order to compile TypeScript.

## Code Splitting
Code splitting is an optimisation technique that splits the code in chunks or small bundles 
which then can be loaded on demand or in parallel, this way it enables the application to load
a lot faster.

The importance of code splitting can be best seen on growing application, as the application 
grows so does the size of the JavaScript file.

### Next.js Code Splitting
Next.js has built-in support for code splitting, that means you don't have to use any
external plugins such as [babel](https://babeljs.io).

When loading the page Next.js only loads the JavaScript necessary for that particular page.
Next.js does this by analysing the resources that is importing.  If for example one of your pages 
makes use of `axios` library, then that specific page will include `axios` in its bundle.  In this way
we make sure that we only send the JavaScript needed to the client. 

Next.js also supports **dynamic import()**, this feature makes it possible to import
JavaScript modules dynamically and load each import as a separate chunks.  To get an 
understanding how that is done you can have a look at your application's built directory 
which is `.next`.

As we mentioned earlier, when you create the application it will generate a README file
which has some basic information such as how to run and build the application,  for convenience,
I'll list some commands here:

```bash
# to run the application
npm dev 
# or 
yarn dev

# to build the application
npm build 
# or 
yarn build
```

In order to see the built folder you would need to build your application.  
Once that done you can then navigate to `.next` directory, there you will see something
like the following:

```.next/static
|- chunks
  |- {someNumber}.{hash}.js
  |- commons.{hash}.js
|- runtime
  |- main-{hash}.js
  |- webpack-{hash}.js
|- {hash}/pages
  |- _app.txs
  |- _error.txs
  |- index.txs
```

As we can see from the above, the code splitting is done by chunks, runtime and by page.

## Routing
Routing is another feature that Next.js supports out of the box.  Next.js uses the file system 
to enable routing, every file that you put under the `pages` directory with the extension 
`.js`, `.jsx`, `ts` or `tsx` automatically becomes a route.

**Pages**
A Next.js page is a React Component,  in
our application that we created earlier on we are going to go ahead and create a
page under `pages` directory called `about.tsx` as follows:

```tsx
// file pages/about.tsx
function About(){
  return <h1>About</h1>
}
export default About
```

The above is a React Component that simply returns a `h1` heading. Now If we run the application
and go to `/about` route, you will see the about page that has `About` tag that we just created.
That's how easy it is to create a route.

### Index Routes
In Next.js a file named `index.ts` or `index.js` in the root directory of any directory under
the `pages` directory, will automatically be a route.

Here are some examples:

- Creating an `index.ts` page at `pages/index.ts` will create a route `/`.
- Creating a page at `pages/blog/index.ts` will create a route at `/blog`

### Nested Routes
If we need to create a nested structure then under `pages` directory we would create directories and
files which would then map to the routes.  Here are some examples:

- `pages/articles/my-first-article.tsx` will create a route `/articles/my-first-article`.
- `pages/admin/settings/user.tsx` will create a route at `/admin/settings/user`

To demonstrate this we will create the following two pages in our app.

```tsx
// file pages/articles/my-first-article.tsx
function MyFirstArticle(){
  return <h1>My First Article</h1>
}
export default MyFirstArticle
```

```tsx
// file pages/admin/settings/user.tsx
function User(){
  return <h1>User</h1>
}
export default User
```

Now if you run the application and navigate to `/articles/my-first-article` or `/admin/settings/user`
you will see the above components being served respectively.

### Dynamic Routes
As explained above routes are defined based on the file and folders that we create 
under `pages` i.e. every file in there maps to a route.

Having said that, there are lots of cases in more complex applications that predefined
routes are not enough and hence where the dynamic routes come in.

To create dynamic routes you can use square brackets in the name of the file 
like so `[param]`.

In the following we are going to create a dynamic route so when people go to `articles/<id>`,
the article id will be sent as a query parameter to the page, in turn we can get this article id 
using router query object and do further processing.

Let's start by creating `[aid].tsx` file under `pages/articles/` like the following:

```tsx
// file pages/articles/[aid].tsx
import {useRouter} from 'next/router'

const Article = () => {
  const router = useRouter()
  const {aid} = router.query

  return <p>Article id: {aid}</p>;
}

export default Article;
```

The route `articles/3` will be matched by `[aid].tsx` so now If you go to 
`articles/3` it will display **Article id: 3**.  The route `articles/3` will
have this query object `{aid:'3'}`.  The `id` can be anything that serves best your
needs that is to say it can be a string a number etc.

If the route has `articles/3?foo=bar` then router query object will have `{foo:'bar', aid:'3'}`, i.e. if
you do `console.log(router.query)` you will then see the above values.

### Nested Multiple Dynamic Routes
In cases where you need two levels of the route to be dynamic such as `articles/3/a-comment`
then you would create a folder and another file under that folder.  Say for example
you want to capture the article id and its comment something like this 
`http://localhost:3000/<id>/<comment>` then in this case would create a directory `[aid]` under the
`pages` and a TypeScript file under `[aid]` so then you would have this structure 
`pages/articles/[aid]/[comment].tsx`.

Then in the `[comment].tsx` file put the following:

```tsx
// file pages/articles/[aid]/[comment].tsx
import {useRouter} from 'next/router'

const Comment = () => {
  const router = useRouter()
  const {comment} = router.query

  return <p>Comment: {comment}</p>;
}

export default Comment;
```

If you go to this route now `articles/3/a-comment` the query will have

```
{comment:'a-comment', aid:'3'}
```

As inside directory `[aid]` we are mapping several routes then one way to tackle this
to create an index file inside `[aid]` directory which would match `/article/<id>` and another
one in our case `[comment].tsx` to map `articles/<id>/<comment>`.  The folder structure would then
be like the below:

```
.
├── [aid]
│   ├── [comment].tsx
│   └── index.tsx
└── my-first-article.tsx

```
### Catching all Routes
In cases when you want to catch all routes, then first you would create a file under
the preferred directory in our case `pages/[...slug]` like so:

```tsx
// file pages/[...slug].tsx

import {useRouter} from 'next/router'

const CatchAll = () => {
  const router = useRouter()

  return <p>This page catches all routes</p>
}

export default CatchAll;
```

If you now run the application and navigate to `http://localhost:3000/a` it will display
the page that we created above.

If you navigate to `http://localhost:3000/a/b` and observer the query like so `console.log(router.query)` then
you will notice that slug now has the following:

```
{
  "slug": [
        "a",
        "b"
    ]
}
```

## Static Generation
One of the great features that Next.js has is static site generation.  There are 
a lot of frameworks can generate static sites, but what makes Next.js different to other SSG frameworks
is the fact that Next.js is hybrid tool which can generate HTML/CSS/JavaScript at run time as well as at build time, 
this and lots of other features makes Next.js a truly great React SSG framework.

Next.js has two form of pre-rendering, **Static Generation** and **Server-side Rendering**.  The
difference between the two is when static assets, such as HTML, JavaScript, CSS etc., are generated.

With the Static Generation HTML pages are generated at build time and after that they
are reused at each request, whereas with Server-side Rendering the pages are generated
at each request.

If Static Generation is used pages will be generated when you run `next build` and from there
you can use a CDN if you want to cache the assets.

## Static Generation without Data Fetching
This is a simple rendering of static pages such at the page that we have created at the
beginning `my-first-article.tsx`

```tsx
function MyFirstArticle(){
  return <h1>My First Article</h1>
}
export default MyFirstArticle
```
Once we created this page and build the application this page will be available as am HTML page. 

## Data Fetching and Static Generation
In cases where you have to fetch the data from an API or similar then you would
use built-in function called `getStaticProps` to fetch the data at build time and 
then serve static pages.

If you are also catching paths then you would need to use `getStaticPaths` built-in function.
This function can be used in addition to the `getStaticProps`.

### Data Fetching and Static Generation Working Example
In the following will got through an example to illustrate this. Let's say we are
capturing article data from an API the way we would implement that is to first fetch
the data using `getStaticProps` then we would have another function to consume those data.

In the following example we will use an example endpoint `https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts` 
that has random posts.

```tsx
function Article({props}) {
  // Here you can further work with props and manipulate data as required
}

export async function getStaticProps() {
  const res = await fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts');
  const articles = await res.json()

  return {
    props: {
      articles,
    }
  }
}

export default Article;
```

In the above functions we are catching all the data from the endpoint and returning
them as `props`, then in turn we are passing the `props` to the above function as a parameter where
we can do further processing.

## Conclusion
If you are familiar with JavaScript, Next.js is very easy to use and learn. Out of the box
support for TypeScript, server-side rendering, static page generation and lots more, makes Next.js
a very strong contender to use for your next project, be it a blog or a complex application that
consumes an internal/external API.
